The Frog King, or Iron Henry
Once upon a time there was a princess who went out into the forest and sat
down at the edge of a cool well. She had a golden ball that was her favorite
plaything. She threw it up high and caught it in the air and was delighted
by all this. One time the ball flew up very high, and as she stretched out her
hand and bent her fingers to catch it again, the ball hit the ground near her
and rolled and rolled until it fell right into the water.
The princess was horrified, and when she went to look for the ball, she
found the well was so deep that she couldn’t see the bottom. So she began
to weep miserably and to lament: “Oh, if only I had my ball again! I’d
give anything—my clothes, my jewels, my pearls and anything else in the
world—to get my ball back!”
As she sat there grieving, a frog stuck its head out of the water and said:
“Why are you weeping so miserably?”
“Oh,” she said, “you nasty frog, you can’t help me! My golden ball has
fallen into the water.”
“Well, I don’t want your pearls, your jewels, and your clothes,” the frog
responded. “But if you will accept me as your companion and let me sit
next to you and let me eat from your little golden plate and sleep in your
little bed and promise to love and cherish me, I’ll fetch your ball for you.”
The princess thought, “what nonsense the simple-minded frog is blabbering! He’s got to remain in his water. But perhaps he can get me my ball.
So I’ll say yes to him.” And she said, “Yes, fair enough, but first fetch me
the golden ball. I promise you everything.”
The frog dipped his head beneath the water and dived down. It didn’t
take long before he came back to the surface with the ball in his mouth. He
threw it onto the ground, and when the princess caught sight of the ball
again, she quickly ran over to it, picked it up, and was so delighted to have
the ball in her hands again that she thought of nothing else but to rush
back home with it. The frog called after her: “Wait, princess, take me with
you the way you promised!”
14 Volume I, chapter 1
But she didn’t pay any attention to him.
The next day the princess sat at the table and heard something coming
up the marble steps, splish, splash! splish, splash! Soon thereafter it knocked
at the door and cried out: “Princess, youngest daughter, open up!”
She ran to the door and opened it, and there was the frog whom she
had forgotten. Horrified, she quickly slammed the door shut and sat down
back at the table. But the king saw that her heart was thumping and said,
“Why are you afraid?”
“There’s a nasty frog outside,” she replied. “He retrieved my golden ball
from the water, and I promised him that he could be my companion. But
I never believed at all he could get out of the water. Now he’s standing
outside in front of the door and wants to come inside.”
As she said this, there was a knock at the door, and the frog cried out:
“Princess, youngest daughter,
Open up!
Don’t you remember, what you said
down by the well’s cool water?
Princess, youngest daughter,
Open up!”
The king said: “You must keep your promise no matter what you said.
Go and open the door for the frog.”
She obeyed, and the frog hopped inside and followed her at her heels
until they came to her chair, and when she sat down again, he cried out:
“Lift me up to the chair beside you.”
The princess didn’t want to do this, but the king ordered her to do it.
When the frog was up at the table, he said: “Now push your little golden
plate nearer to me so we can eat together.”
The princess had to do this as well, and after he had eaten until he was
full, he said: “Now I’m tired and want to sleep. Bring me upstairs to your
little room. Get your little bed ready so that we can lie down in it.”
The princess became terrified when she heard this, for she was afraid
of the cold frog. She didn’t dare to touch him, and now he was to lie in 
The Frog King, or Iron Henry 15
her bed next to her. She began to weep and didn’t want to comply with
his wishes at all. But the king became angry and ordered her to do what
she had promised, or she’d be held in disgrace. Nothing helped. She had
to do what her father wanted, but she was bitterly angry in her heart.
So she picked up the frog with two fingers, carried him upstairs into her
room, lay down in her bed, and instead of setting him down next to her,
she threw him crash! against the wall. “Now you’ll leave me in peace, you
nasty frog!”
But the frog didn’t fall down dead. Instead, when he fell down on
the bed, he became a handsome young prince. Well, now indeed he did
become her dear companion, and she cherished him as she had promised,
and in their delight they fell asleep together.
The next morning a splendid coach arrived drawn by eight horses
with feathers and glistening gold harnesses. The prince’s Faithful Henry
accompanied them. He had been so distressed when he had learned his
master had been turned into a frog that he had ordered three iron bands
to be wrapped around his heart to keep it from bursting from grief. When
the prince got into the coach with the princess, his faithful servant took
his place at the back so they could return to the prince’s realm. And after
they had traveled some distance, the prince heard a loud cracking noise
behind him. So, he turned around and cried out: “Henry, the coach is
breaking!”
“No, my lord, it’s really nothing
but the band around my heart,
which nearly came apart
when you turned into a frog and your fortune fell
and you were made to live in that dreadful well.”
Two more times the prince heard the cracking noise and thought the
coach was breaking, but the noise was only the sound of the bands springing from Faithful Henry’s heart because his master had been released from
the spell and was happy.